---
layout: post
title: Thinking in Emergencies
date: 2013-12-04 16:27:31
disqus: y
---

While reviewing multitudes of impact evaluation frameworks, I'm also speeding through Elaine Scarry's short book *Thinking in an Emergency*. A couple of us at UW will discuss it as a reading group, and I agreed because of the nature of my research into humanitarian and emergency management. Although I'm only halfway through it, I thought I would spend a moment to reflect on early connections to my research and to the impact evaluation framework project.

In the first chapter Scarry picks up an idea that [I have considered](http://burnsr77.github.io/2012/09/academic-contributions/) in the past: the argument that in some contexts *thinking* is in dichotomous and mutually-exclusive relation to *doing*. Emergencies are conceptualized along the lines of Aesop's drowning swimmer, who is confronted by a passerby andtold the merits of avoiding situations in which one might drown. The swimmer responds, "No. Save me now. Lecture me later."This fable, however, carries a double-meaning that confuses the boundary between thinking and doing. For one, the passerby correctly notes that thinking can help one avoid emergencies in which they need to be saved. Put another way, the greatest merit is in avoiding a situation "that licenses anyone else to reprimand you" \(p. 9\). Building on this tale, Scarry argues that *doing* in emergencies usually entails layers upon layers of *thinking* prior to the emergency. For Scarry, this is the case in Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) training, emergency management plans, and mutual aid agreements.

I saw this reflected in my own research, where an oft-repeated axiom was: "If you're deploying a technology during an emergency, you're already too late." This quote suggests that socio-technological practices need to be integrated into emergency managers' habitual routines prior to an emergency, so that a particular kind of thinking \(Aristotle's "deliberative" thinking\) can be engaged during the response. At this point it's important to be reminded that even emergency managers distinguish 4 stages of emergency management, each of which, Scarry and I would both seem to argue, requiring a distinct form of thinking. Those four stages include preparation, mitigation, response, and recovery \(to sink further into the rabbit hole I've constructed, I should point out that this *conceptualization* of emergency management is in itself the result of another form of thinking - research\), and each of these requires its own set of knowledge-actions and knowledge-dispersion. So, to repeat, emergencies do not construct a mutually exclusive relationship between thinking and doing.

Public scholars might be interested in the discussion on mutual aid agreements in Saskatchewan, Africa \(Ethiopia and Zimbabwe\), and Japan. In these contexts, during emergencies the formal response community's burden was lessened by communal "economies of affection" - communities giving aid to each other long beforeemergency responders could begin their operations. In early-2000s drought-stricken Ethiopia only 9% of aid was provided by relatives, and this number fell as the drought worsened. Scarry summarizes Putnam \(*Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy*\): "Citizens of towns with extensive practice of voluntary association contacted their governmental officials much less often; and when they did, the issue raised was almost always some problem of public interest." In other words, communities work better together, and lessen the impacts of emergencies, when they have a strong network of voluntary associations.

Of course, calling on the public sector is not a "bad" thing, despite politicians constructing such people as "undeserving" and "dependent", and emergency management should remain a responsibility primarily of the public sector. However, I think most people would agree that the greatest value is in establishing strong community ties so that citizens are politically, socially, and materially empowered to provide aid and assistance to each other outside the circuit of public-sector emergency management. At least, that's the kind of world *I* would like to live in. Scarry rightly notes that such relations have a great number of additional benefits: potentially increased government accountability and "as Tocqueville long ago stressed, \[voluntary associations\] act as a safeguard, diminishing the impact the executive power of a state can have on the people."

I'm only halfway finished with the book, but given that it's only \~100 pages I think it's fair to offer a few critiques of the book. Scarry, a professor of English at Harvard, is primarily concerned with a sort of humanities-based approach to understanding the relation between thought and emergencies, and although this contribution is solid, I would have appreciated more empirically-grounded nuance. For instance, above I mention that each stage of the emergency management process requires a different mode of thinking; that kind of understanding of the EM process has not yet been shown in the book. And Scarry gives empirical examples of thinking that support her points, I don't see the methodological rigor of social science accounts, such as an in-depth exploration of a particular context, or an explanation of how/why she chooses particular examples over others. Spending some time working as a researcher alongside emergency managers might have contributed to the strength of her claims and how she chooses evidence to support those claims.