---
layout: post
title: Research assistants, community work, and Haiyan
date: 2013-11-8 16:27:31
disqus: y
---

Given that this research project is about evaluation, I found myself in a funny situation this week evaluating applications for our research assistant positions. Our goal of over a dozen interviews, plus a thorough inductive analysis of the resulting data, necessitates we get someone on board to help us with this work. A simple description of the work sent to two digital humanitarian listserves \(CrisisMappers and Crisis Commons\) generated a surprising amount of interest, both in terms of the number of applicants, and in terms of personal emails expressing support for the project. That's actually one of the things I love about this community - the amount of genuine interpersonal support they offer each other!

One of the dual challenges/rewards of doing community-based work is figuring out who the key actors are in any given setting. A community strategizes and confronts pressures differently in different spatial and temporal contexts, and depending on the power structures being resisted. This creates a rich dynamic where the relations and approaches evolve and adapt. In the case of my research project, the people we are interviewing include those who have either engaged the digital humanitarian community, or have actively refused to do so. The first group is obvious: we want to know what, exactly, formal humanitarian institutions need from the digital humanitarian community and the outcomes hoped for when activating them. The second group is less obvious, but we want to know what it is about the digital humanitarian community that has prevented them from being used in the past; if we can figure this out, we can build this precaution into our evaluation framework. As researchers of technology know, "opting out" of a new technology can be an intentional strategy. 

I wanted to spend just a minute to think about Typhoon Haiyan, which passed through the Philippines a few days ago and is currently making landfall in Southeast Asia. Immediately, I wanted to express my hope that they have a speedy recovery without [the many political and social upheavals often accompanying disasters](http://www.naomiklein.org/shock-doctrine). But more to the point of this blog post, there are two principles that relate to the limits of the research project I'm currently conducting, and we're currently seeing them unfold in Haiyan's wake. The first is the principle that humanitarianism is based on a discursive social relation. That relation is constituted by assumptions about who has the resources - and therefore the responsibility - to provide certain kinds of "aid" in a humanitarian crisis \(to take the notion of a "humanitarian crisis" for granted\). Depending on the nature of the situation being addressed (humanitarian, natural disaster, social conflict, development), the nature of "aid" changes and can never be perfectly aligned with needs. So, these complexities - along with other social, political, and economic reconfigurations - have led to [some pretty](http://matadornetwork.com/change/7-worst-international-aid-ideas/) [serious fiascos](http://www.amazon.com/The-Crisis-Caravan-Whats-Humanitarian/dp/B005Q5TQF4) within the humanitarian community. And these are more than just one-off mistakes that can be learned from; they are the [structural result](http://www.amazon.com/Least-All-Possible-Evils-Humanitarian/dp/1844676471) of knowledge's limits and the social relations that exist between different geographies. What reminded me of this principle was reading [a recent article by Katz](http://www.beaconreader.com/jonathan-katz/how-to-help-the-philippines-slow-down) entitled "How to Help the Philippines: Slow Down" in which he succinctly argues "A terrible tragedy has struck these Pacific islands, and caring people across the world are trying to help. Problem is, we generally do a pretty bad job of it."

Second, despite promises from its proponents, digital humanitarianism - as one particular component of the broader humanitarian process - can never completely revolutionize traditional humanitarianism. I think the most outspoken evangelists of digital humanitarianism are starting to isolate the specific points at which it can assist in the broader intervention, and they are beginning to retreat from their previous heady claims. For an example of where digital humanitarianism isn't able to help a situation, in Haiyan's wake there were [widespread outages of communications channels](http://worldnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/11/11/21399516-there-are-so-many-areas-that-we-have-no-information-aid-workers-worry-that-full-extent-of-typhoon-haiyan-devastation-not-yet-known) where responders simply don't know what the situation is. They lack what emergency responders call "situational awareness." If, in an unlikely hypothetical situation, emergency responders were to use Ushahidi and see that hundreds of reports had been submitted in, say, Cebu but none in Ormoc and decided to send aid to the "needy" people in Cebu, there's an obvious problem since communications channels in Ormoc are down. Further, because Ushahidi displays individual reports, it's difficult to see the connections between them - and those relations are often as important as the data itself. 

With these potential problems, why do I participate in digital humanitarian activities? Why am I conducting this research project? How do I justify such a contradiction? Primarily, it's because the stakes are so high and I have hope that I can somehow influence the field as it matures. I am one of few researchers studying *the field itself* \(there are lots of people doing applied research\), and I hope that by comprehending the mechanisms that help the field work, I can interject in strategic ways to move it ever-so-slightly in a really beneficial direction. That's where this research project comes in. It's ushering me toward my goals in a number of ways, by helping me: connect with digital humanitarian managers, produce research that will likely impact how digital humanitarian projects are conducted, trouble the ways projects are evaluated, and helping bolster the community's professionalism. In my broader research I hope to understand how inequalities are (re)produced in digital humanitarianism *in order to counteract those inequalities*. That, as humanitarians like to say, is me *doing*. Plus, digital humanitarians are able to collect and interpret *some knowledges* that may improve the ways in which workers respond to emergencies. For example, Google.org set up a [Person Finder for Typhoon Haiyan](http://google.org/personfinder/2013-yolanda), the point of which is to find missing persons by connecting those with knowledge to those missing. Another example is how UN OCHA, in order to coordinate the different humanitarian efforts, has set up [a crowdsourcing platform](http://crowdcrafting.org/app/MM_TweetClicker/) where volunteers sort information-carrying Tweets from the rest of the "noise". This will help humanitarian agencies have better awareness of the on-the-ground conditions in spaces where communications channels are still up \(and, conversely, *not* in places where those channels are down\). In other words, there's a lot of really great stuff happening in the field, and I hope to maximize that potential while ameliorating negative implications.