---
layout: post
title: Getting Started
date: 2013-10-15 15:27:31
---

This week I spoke with my primary collaborator, Kenny Meesters, to really begin the meat of our research project. We also had on the line Svend-Jonas, a master's student in geography at Heidelberg University, who may be interested in either contributing to our project or extending out from it for his master's degree research. We reiterated that our immediate goals are to schedule a few interviews, review the literature on evaluation frameworks, and talk to others who have conducted similar projects. 

In terms of auspicious beginning points, there are a few key organizations and individuals we hope will launch us into the project. The Assessment Capacities Project (ACAPS) and  Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action (ALNAP) both produce evaluation systems and commentaries on the evaluation process. Kenny and I have both been interviewed by a researcher at UN OCHA for a related research project, and we are confident they will share their data with us. Thus, in addition to our original research we also will analyze data from a closely related project. Being a member of the community will help us enormously, and in fact is the reason we decided on this particular project! Finding people to interview will come easily for us because we're already well-connected.

I have begun building the technological infrastructure for the future portfolio. This is not yet meant for presentation; right now into this infrastructure I am placing everything playing a role in the practicum project. This approach, similar to the one I took when developing my first portfolio in the certificate program - archive now, process and present later. I'm going to try to use GitHub for this.

Already, quite early in the practicum project, I'm reminded of the challenge involved in *performing* public scholarship (that is, distinct from *communicating* or learning how to *identify* a public scholarly identity). It seems possible that being a public scholar involves not just a [think of a synonym - distinct] set of practices and approach to the research practice, but also notably *more* work. On the one hand as an academic researcher I conduct research programs for their intellectual merit and must firstly develop this contribution; on the other hand, I am also responsible for ensuring my public understands and has indeed helped me locate my practice-based contributions. In my case, I hope to build understanding of the social, economic, and political implications of new technologies; but I also need to translate these implications into transformed digital humanitarian practices. Imagine a better way of *doing* digital humanitarianism that ameliorates some of the more problematic theoretical implications of digital humanitarian technologies. Does this mean that my task as a public scholar is necessarily one that [think of a synonym - involves] more work than traditional scholarship? If so, it's still a small price to pay for the payoffs of a properly-impacting, community-engaged approach to research.